---
layout: post
title: Actually, Rent Control Is Great
draft: true
---

In April of this year, the Ontario provincial government announced that it was going to extend rent control to every dwelling in the province, as opposed to just buildings constructed before 1991.

This prompted a lot of commentary, and the chorus was overwhelmingly negative. Critics argued that under rent control the quantity and quality of available rental units will fall as developers are less incentivized to build rental properties &mdash; and that the province should instead tackle the root of the problem: the supply of new housing is not keeping up with demand.

To me this seemed strange, since removing the exemption seemed like a no-brainer. I've been renting in Toronto for almost a decade now, and I've watched rents in my neighbourhood(s) climb substantially. In that period I have moved eight times, and whenever I have looked for housing the uncertainty of living in an uncontrolled apartment weighed heavily on my mind. Much to my disappointment, few if any critics actually addressed the problem at hand: the lack of security of tenure. This prompted me to look into the research.

Moving all the time is a big expense, but the real cost is in the instability it inflicts. The constant possibility of eviction, two months notice, changes your relationship with the community around you. If your stay is likely to be short, then volunteering at your local school or investing in strong local ties doesn't make a lot of sense. Quite the opposite: it may well be in your interest that your community not improve or appreciate _too much_. A new transit system that causes the cost of your home to exceed your resources and forces you to move is no cause for celebration. 

Studies have found that being a homeowner, as opposed to a tenant, means you live longer and are both physically and psychologically healthier. It makes you less likely to retire early due to health reasons and homeowners on average spend less time unemployed. Owners live in neighbourhoods with lower crime rates, and their children are less likely to suffer from depression, and are more likely to graduate from high school. Since we spend many times more money subsidizing homeownership than we do helping tenants, it’s hard to escape the conclusion that these effects are externalities we deliberately impose on renters.

Meanwhile, our rent controls do not actually have the pernicious effect on the supply of new rental housing that is attributed to them. While a strict price control that causes real costs to rise above real incomes is indeed harmful, that does not actually describe the kind of rent control we have in Ontario. Consider that in Ontario rent control on new buildings was permanently exempted in 1998, but we built far more rental housing in the 1970s and 1980s than we do today. A well designed control does not actually harm new supply, and this is corroborated by research in many other cities. 

A more likely explanation can be found in the legalization of condominiums, in 1967, and the federal government’s overhaul of our tax system in 1972. Prior to the Condominium Act all apartment buildings were rentals, since title could not be sold for individual units. And prior to the new Income Tax Act, rental buildings were attractive tax shelters for high income individuals looking for stable returns on their investment. Since building to own is less risky and more profitable than building to rent, in practice condominiums crowd out investment in rental buildings. Their impact is easy to see in Toronto’s housing statistics.

Commentators do us a disservice when they pretend rent controls are about affordability or redistribution and ignore concerns over security of tenure. Today, low and middle income people have been priced out of ownership in our city. Why should they be subjected to a tenure regime that significantly disadvantages them socially, economically and politically compared to the subsidized homeowning population?

